add adr about FE to BE interaction (#104)
digitalservicebund/ris-adm-vwv: doc/adr/0004-frontend-to-backend-interaction.md

> # 4. Frontend to Backend interaction

Reviewer: ```suggestion
# 4. Frontend to Backend Interaction
```

Reviewer: No better idea, yet, but I feel like there is some other, established terminology we could use, here. It may consist of the terms
* "separation of concerns"
* "endpoints"
* "API"

Author: @andreas-deazevedo some idea how to improve the headline?

Reviewer 2: @reckseba Maybe something like "responsibilities of backend and frontend on loading and storing documents". That is quite long.

Another (or additional) option is to create two ADR files, one for frontend, one for backend. Maybe that could improve readability in so far, that as reader I can quickly get what the backend is responsible for and what the frontend is responsible for.

Date: 2025-01-24

## Status

> Proposed

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Accepted
```

... I know you know :)

## Context

When new documentation units (DU) are created, edited and saved, several possibilities exist how to handle the state of form elements. In ADR 0002 we have decided to use Pinia to store state in the frontend (FE). But how do we keep the state in sync between the FE and the backend (BE) in a multi user environment where different actors work on the same DU until it reaches its desired state, where it's finally being pushed to the S3 bucket of the Portal?

> Possibilities/Challenges are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Main questions:
```

1. Generate DU number (example KSNR054920707) in the FE or BE?
1. Generate DU number when a new, empty DU is being created or when the process is finalized (Abgabe)?

> 1. Have BE API endpoints for every form element or one endpoint for the whole DU form state, where the Pinia store is being synced with?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Have BE API endpoints for every form element or one endpoint for syncing the whole DU form (pinia) state?
```

I tried to simplify. Maybe you have a an even better idea.

1. Transform the form state to XML/LDML right away when data arrives at a BE API endpoint or keep state somehow in an in-between/in-process format (like JSON)?

> 1. Transform form inputs into XML/LDML already in the FE before sending?

Author: integrated

> 1. Work with the database schema from migration or generate a new schema?

Author: will put it to it's own ADR when finally decided (whether or not to create its own schema)

1. Do we keep the XML/LDML in the database when we push to the portal s3 bucket?

> 

Author: Each ordered list entry has a connection to the corresponding entry in the previous section

1. Generate DU number when a new, empty DU is being created or when the process is finalized (DE: "Abgabe")?
1. Will we have BE API endpoints for every form element or one endpoint for syncing the whole DU form (pinia) state?
1. Transform the form state to XML/LDML
   1. in the FE, or
   1. when data arrives at a BE API endpoint, or
   1. when it's published?
1. How do we fetch finally submitted DUs?
1. Do we keep the XML/LDML in the database when we push to the portal s3 bucket?

## Decision

We have decided to go with the following setup:

1. The DU number will be generated on the BE side.
1. The DU number is being generated when the DU is created and will be written to the database right away (DU will be in draft state).
1. There will be only one endpoint where the whole Pinia state for all form elements combined is being pushed to in JSON format.
1. We will keep the data in JSON format as long as the editing process is still ongoing without transforming it. The transformation to XML/LDML will be done when the DU is finally submitted (DE: "Abgabe").
   1. Once we successfully transform the JSON to XML/LDML, we will delete the JSON data from the database.

>    1. The FE will not deal with XML/LDML.

Reviewer 2: I would prefer a positive formulated statement:
```suggestion
   1. The FE will deal with JSON only. The BE is resposible for transforming JSON into XML/LDML and vice-versa.
```

1. When a finally submitted DU is re-opened, the XML/LDML will be re-transformed to JSON on the BE, in a way that the Pinia store can read it in the FE.
1. We keep the XML/LDML for all DUs in the database as it remains the single source of truth.

## Consequences

First we will state the consequences while appending the reasoning for the decisions right underneath each ordered list item:

> 1. We provide one API endpoint to create new DUs. It will anser with the newly created DU number which uniquely identifies it.

Reviewer: I notice that this is not a consequence, but more details (maybe even too much for an ADR) on how the decision looks like.

The consequence probably is something like: "Creating an empty DU requires an API call and the database will contain empty documents"

>    - The information of the next free sequential number is only known to the BE. We will **not** keep the numbering schema that the BSG is using at the moment, where the last four digits represent employees that shall take care of that DU (example KSNR054920707).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The information of the next free sequential number is only known to the BE. 
```

1. We create a database entry even if no form element is filled.

>    - To align with NeuRIS behavior (Case-Law).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - This behavior aligns with other NeuRIS components (e.g. Case-Law).
```

> 1. We provide one API endpoint where the whole Pinia state for all form elements combined will be pushed to, which accepts JSON format.

Reviewer 2: Not sure, if "whole Pinia state" would include a model with functions from Pinia? Or are we talking about one instance of a frontend type `DocumentationUnit`?

> 1. We provide one API endpoint where the whole Pinia state for all form elements combined will be pushed to, which accepts JSON format.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We provide one API endpoint where the whole document will be pushed to.
```

>    - It would be much more work to create models on the BE for each form-group and we would enter a route where an ER-Model representation of all form elements is being generated, which we wanted to get around in the first place, by defining LDML as first-class-citizen.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - This greatly simplifies the models: There's one used for unpublished documents (sent and received by FE and BE) and one for published documents. None for partial upgrades. 
```

>    - Anyhow that comes with a price of much more data being transferred as actually needed. But we think that this is negligible in a sense that not many (1-10) users are interacting with the BE at the same time and therefore we do not see performance bottlenecks.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - We assume that the amount of data will not make a noticeable difference to the (~10) users.
```

>    - The to-be-defined BE API is only being accessed from this very FE. It's not public and no other application is supposed to access it. Therefore the API has only one purpose to make our own FE work. It's not a requirement to server a fine grained API.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - We are the only consumers of our API, therefore we can tailor it to our very specific needs.
```

1. Only valid, schema validated XML/LDML data is stored in the database.
   - This way we do not need to keep additional meta information about the state of the XML/LDML.

>    - When transforming the form state from JSON to XML/LDML, all requirements to all input form-fields are finally examined. As there is an actual XSD schema already existing (from the migration project), the transformed document only needs to get schema validated. Which will result in errors, when required fields are empty or filled with wrongly formatted data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - Form data validation becomes XML schema validation. Schema errors will need to be transferred to the FE and made understandable as form errors there.
```

>    - The FE is kept clear of any XML domain knowledge.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - The FE is kept clear of any XML or XML schema.
```

> 1. We provide one API endpoint where the whole Pinia state for all form elements combined can be derived from, which will respond in JSON.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. We provide an API endpoint where the whole document can be fetched from in JSON.
```

> 1. We will only push to the S3 bucket. We will never pull data from that S3 bucket.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. The relation between BE and the portal becomes very simple: The BE only pushes to the portal and never pulls.
```

>    - We need to be able to replicate the portal from the database as only the database is being planned to have regular backups (NeuRIS wide strategy). The S3 buckets can not be trusted in that sense.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   - There is a NeuRIS agreement that in case of disaster, we need to be able to replicate the portal from the database backups.
```
